LVNS README: Dynamic Routing (DR) Assignment

Purpose: This document is intended to familiarize students with everything they
need to know in order complete the Dynamic Routing assignment.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I) Overview

The goal of this assignment is to improve students' familiarity with RIP (or
another dynamic routing protocol) by having them implement one of these.  The
student's code will be responsible for maintaining the dynamic routing table and
communicating over the dynamic routing protocol with other routers.

To enable students to focus on dynamic routing, the rest of the router is
provided as the "dr" binary.  This binary relies on an API provided by a shared
library to handle dynamic routing - this library will be implemented by
students.  The student implements the API specified in dr_api.h - initial
placeholder definitions for the API is in dr_api.c.  The following functions
must be implemented by the students (more details are in the comments in
dr_api.h):

  safe_dr_get_next_hop(ip) -- This method is called when the router needs to
    know how to route a packet.  This method simply returns which interface the
    packet should be sent out of and the IP address of the next hop.

  safe_dr_handle_packet(...) -- This method is called whenever the router
    receives a dynamic routing packet.  Based on the contents of the packet, the
    method might update the student's dynamic routing table and/or send out new
    routing packets of its own.

  safe_dr_handle_periodic() -- This method is called at a regular interval by
    the router.  The method should make any updates which are required based on
    the passage of time (perhaps expire entries in the routing table or send out
    dynamic routing packets).

  safe_dr_interface_changed(intf, state_changed, cost_changed) -- This method is
    called whenever an interface is is changed in terms of whether it is enabled
    or its cost to send a packet.  The state_changed and cost_changed parameters
    are boolean flags which indicate whether the state or cost was changed.

  dr_init -- This method may be used to initialize any internal data structures
    (like a dynamic routing table).  It will be called before any of the
    previous methods are called.

The functions prefixed by "safe_" are called by wrapper functions of the same
name (minus the "safe_" part).  Those wrapper functions simply provide
synchronization at a coarse level so you do not have to worry about
synchronization issues.

Three helper functions are provided for students by the dr binary:

  dr_interface_count() -- This methods simply returns the number of interfaces
    attached to the router.  This will not change while the router is running.

  dr_get_interface(index) -- This method gets a *copy* of the information
    associated with the interface specified by index.  This includes the
    interface's IP address, subnet mask, whether it is on, and the cost to
    transmit over the interface.  Any of these values may change over time.  The
    value of index should be between 0 (inclusive) and dr_interface_count()
    (exclusive).

  dr_send_payload -- This method is used to send a dynamic routing packet.  Only
    the payload of the packet should be sent (e.g. it should be in the same
    format as received by dr_handle_packet - do not wrap it in a UDP or any
    other header).  Hint: You have to specify IPs for both the ultimate
    destination and the next hop on the way to that destination; dyanmic routing
    advertisements will therefore make these two the same since it is only
    sending packets to a special IP.

Finally, to further enable students to focus on dynamic routing, students do not
have to worry about threading issues.  The skeleton implementation provides a
coarse locking structure which acquires a lock when the function starts and
releases it when it is done.  The lock is recursive so students may call these
methods from each other if they so desire.  This means that there should be no
synchronization, deadlock, or other similar problems for students to worry
about.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
II) Running the assignment

The lab consists of three parts.  The routers (dr instances) and the library
which implements the dynamic routing API (libdr.so) were already discussed.  The
third component is the lvns binary.  lvns is a server which manages the topology
and plumbs together nodes in the topology.  It also listens on standard in for
commands to change the topology -- run the "help" command for a list of
available commands and how to use them.

To run the lab, first start the lvns server.  You can optionally tell it an
initial topology to create by specifying the -t switch:

  ./lvns -t simple.topo

Next, you need to start each dr instance (one for each router in the topology).
If the server is running on the same machine as the dr instance, then you can
start a router which takes control of a node named "dr1" like this:

  ./dr -v dr1

The lvns server creates a .port file which says which port it is listening on.
The dr instance reads that file to determine which port to listen on.  If you
are running dr from a separate location you'll want to specify the server's
address and port explicitly (using whatever port number the server is actually
running on):

  ./dr -v dr1 -s myth5.stanford.edu -p 9999

Once you have a dr instance attached to each node in the topology, you can enter
commands to lvns to change the cost of transmitting over certain links or take
links up and down.  You can then query your routers using the lvns route command
to see if your routers have appropriately updated their routing tables:

   lvns> cost set link 10.0.0.0 10.0.0.1 5  # set the cost of a link to 5
   lvns> link del 10.0.0.0 10.0.0.1        # delete a link
   lvns> route get dr1 10.0.0.2           # ask dr1 how it would get to 10.0.0.2

   Important note: A next-hop IP of 0.0.0.0 indicates that the next hop is the
     ultimate destination.  For example, if the router was asked how to route to
     the subnet 192.168.1.0/24 and it was directly connected to that subnet,
     then it ought to respond with 0.0.0.0 as the next-hop IP.
